datastories
===========             
What happened: Supporting narrative inquiry into data for Type 1 Diabetes

Individuals with Type 1 diabetes are overwhelmed with data and yet are underwhelmed with meaningful explanations about causal relationships between their everyday diets, activity, moods and their glucose readings.  The current displays of glucose data are problematic because they are typically fixed on presenting glucose data without accommodation for patient input about their own behavior (activity, movement, location), or for patient inquiry (observations, hypotheses, proto-patterns), which are important components of diabetes self-management.  

Storytelling is a practice that has existed for centuries, and represents one of the most powerful ways to communicate ideas and concepts; however, it has been underutilized in the management of type 1 diabetes.  With this project, we propose to bring human narrative and experience back into the data.  As Jonathan Harris, data visualization artist describes: “I think people have begun to forget how powerful human stories are, ex- changing their sense of empathy for a fetishistic fascination with data, networks, patterns, and total information... Really, the data is just part of the story. The human stuff is the main stuff, and the data should enrich it.” Storytelling has been shown to be an effective tool for persuasive communication in health, and to improve health outcomes in chronic disease. (Houston et al. PMID: 21242364). Our concept provides an innovative way of extending this paradigm to the arena of type 1 diabetes. 

We propose a dynamic system of interactive data visualization that anchors patient stories and observations (how diabetes is experienced in the real world) to real-time clinical diabetes data (the “numbers” of diabetes) with the intent of encouraging patients to actively identify meaningful patterns in their data; at the same time, the annotated data corpus from the broader body of users can help medical researchers to develop a more quantitative understanding about the pervasiveness of different environmental or lifestyle factors on patient health.  

The ultimate goal of this project is to give patients with type 1 diabetes the ability to better manage and treat their diabetes on a daily basis.  Maintaining normal levels of blood sugar is a daily struggle, even for the most sophisticated of patients.  Patients with type 1 are scientists, who through trial and error on a daily basis are experimenting to see what can help them maintain the best control possible. They need tools to help them better see trends and determine how and where to intervene.  

The ability to tell stories combined with rich data has been facilitated by the advent of interactive data visualization techniques (i.e. d3).  Powerful examples of narrative storytelling using data and visualization techniques are the interactive infographics produced by the New York Times. We will build on this prototype to display the massive amounts of blood sugar and insulin data available through traditional medical devices, but anchor this data in patient reported experience, both passively and actively collected, from mobile phones carried by the patient (to measure mood, movement, activity), google calendar (to capture events), and facebook/twitter (to measure social activity/interaction).  Creating a narrative-oriented view of data can then provide patients with profound insights into blood sugar patterns and a means for addressing alterations in blood sugar through the memes of their everyday lives (adjustments in insulin at school, or at soccer practice, or before the next birthday party).   

Our concept seeks to reconcile scientific and narrative ways of understanding diabetes; whereas patients naturally use narrative to correspond their experience to meaning, patients often find that the data from their glucose-readings to be uninteresting or incomprehensible.  By using interactive data visualization to marry the narrative and scientific sequence of events, we promote evidence-based inquiry and outcomes in people’s management of their diabetes.  Our data sources will consist of the tools that individuals use to manage their diabetes and lives (glucometers, insulin pumps, continuous glucose monitoring systems, mobile phones, calendars, social media) but will integrate all of these datastreams into compelling displays that can be used to provide greater understanding of the cause and effect of life events of blood sugar patterns, and that can direct individuals to make actionable decisions with the data.  

OUR TEAM includes: myself (Joyce Lee, MD, MPH), a Pediatric Endocrinologist/Researcher at the University of Michigan, who seeks to develop interactive information visualization techniques that will patients/clinicians with management of glycemi; Ben West, a skilled programmer and individual with type 1, who is passionate about data visualization and the seamless integration of multiple sources of diabetes data; Wendy Ju, PhD an Human Computing Interaction Design Researcher at Stanford University, and Fan Meng, PhD, is a bioinformatician at the University of Michigan with expertise in the development of multiscale visualizations of large complex datasets. 

